---
layout: post
title: "Chapter 4.1: Diving into OCaml Modules Part I"
description: "Understanding and implemention of OCaml modules"
date: 2016-10-16
tags: [ocaml, modules]
comments: false
share: false
---

# Modules
In this chapter we will touch on OCaml modules, which is an integral part to this project, and how we can make use of it in a general sense with some examples. For this chapter, we will be exploring OCaml modules with reference to the following official [OCaml tutorial](https://ocaml.org/learn/tutorials/modules.html) closely. We will be discussing some examples from the tutorial and some of my personal understanding of the concepts.

## Started From The Bottom
Let us get started on some basics of modules with a simple <i>hello</i> executable. To build this executable, we will first write two files, ```amodule.ml``` and ```bmodule.ml```. Each of these will automatically define two modules ```Amodule``` and ```Bmodule``` respectively.

Below, is the code in ```amodule.ml```, which prints a string that we have specified in the code:

```ocaml
let hello () = print_endline "Hello, graduation!"
```

And, here is the code in ```bmodule.ml```:

```ocaml
Amodule.hello ()
```

In this code, we access the "hello" function in <i>amodule</i> by using the name of the module (with the first letter capitalized), a dot, and the method that we want to access.

In order to compile these files into an executable, we will have to do them one by one with following commands:

```
ocamlopt -c amodule.ml
ocamlopt -c bmodule.ml
ocamlopt -o hello amodule.cmx bmodule.cmx
```

*<b>Note:</b> As you have noticed, the compilation command that we have used here is slightly different from the one below that we have used previously for compiling our <i>lablgtk</i> examples:

```
ocamlfind ocamlc -g -package lablgtk2 -linkpkg simple.ml -o simple
```

The difference between these two is that `ocamlc` is the bytecode compiler, whereas, `ocamlopt` is the native code compiler. `ocamlopt` is faster as it compiles our code to standalone executables which is for most cases faster than bytecode. I shall not go into further details for compilations options like `-c` or '-o' as we can just refer to the documentation right [here](http://caml.inria.fr/pub/docs/manual-ocaml/comp.html) for what they actually do.

Let us leave the topic on compilation with OCaml for another day and get back to what we are here for; getting into the basics of OCaml.

There is an alternative to how we can access our modules and that is by making use of `open` which makes the module's contents directly accessible. As mentioned in the tutorial, using `open` is a matter of personal prefernce. To demonstrate the use of `open` we will look at the following code blocks.

This is the updated version of `amodule.ml` with an additional <i>bye</i> function:

```ocaml
let hello () = print_endline "Hello, graduation!"

let bye () = print_endline "Farewell, NUS!"
```

And here is the code for our new `cmodule.ml`:

```ocaml
open Amodule

let () = 
	bye ()
```

In our 'cmodule.ml' we open <b>Amodule</b> at the start of our file, then we call the "bye" function in <b>Amodule</b>. As for the compilation, it will be the same as covered above.

## Interfaces and Signatures	
In this section, we will look at interfaces and signatures with modules. The definition of a module interface would be that it is a mask over our modules's implemetation. Let us look at our `moduleMasking.ml` file below, which demonstrates the use of module interface:

```ocaml
let message = "Hello there, module interfaces!"
let hello () = print_endline message
```

The following are the interfaces for `moduleMasking`:

```ocaml
val message : string
val hello unit -> unit
```

In order to mask the interface for our "hello" function, we will define the interface in our `moduleMasking.mli` file shown below:

```ocaml
val hello: unit -> unit
(* Displays our message *)
```

For compilation, we will compile the .mli files right before their .ml files. Regardless of if the .ml files are compiled using `ocamlopt`, .mli files will be compiled using `ocamlc`. An example of that will be the following:

```
ocamlc -c amodule.mli
ocamlopt -c amodule.ml
...
``` 

## Abstract types
Masking of abstract types are largely similar to how we mask interfaces. What sets them apart is that there are four options available when we write the .mli file for type defininitions:

These are the four options as mentioned in the tutorial:

* Type is completely omitted from the signature.
* The type definition is copy-pasted into the signature.
* The type is made abstract: only its name is given.
* The record fields are made read-only.

The purpose of all these is to allow proper usage of a module to prevent breakage. One other reason for this will be for when we want to build a library. With this, we can continue to expose the same interface while we make changes to the internal implementations or data structures.

## To be continued...
In the next chapter, we will cover the rest of modules which includes submodules and functors. Additionally, we will also look at examples of manipulation of modules. 
